{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1404\cocoasubrtf470
\cocoascreenfonts1{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;\f1\fmodern\fcharset0 Courier;\f2\fnil\fcharset0 HelveticaNeue;
\f3\fnil\fcharset0 LucidaGrande;\f4\fnil\fcharset0 Monaco;\f5\fswiss\fcharset0 ArialMT;
\f6\froman\fcharset0 Times-Roman;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red217\green11\blue0;\red77\green77\blue77;\red128\green128\blue128;
\red154\green154\blue154;\red103\green29\blue0;\red179\green179\blue179;\red164\green8\blue0;\red110\green5\blue0;
\red63\green105\blue30;\red69\green39\blue0;\red73\green0\blue0;\red205\green205\blue205;\red230\green230\blue230;
\red217\green234\blue202;\red38\green38\blue38;\red14\green14\blue14;\red252\green252\blue252;\red20\green65\blue152;
\red242\green242\blue242;\red174\green174\blue174;\red21\green21\blue21;\red26\green26\blue26;\red32\green35\blue35;
\red11\green11\blue11;\red209\green209\blue209;\red108\green108\blue108;\red246\green246\blue246;}
{\*\listtable{\list\listtemplateid1\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid1\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid1}
{\list\listtemplateid2\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{disc\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid101\'01\uc0\u8226 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid2}
{\list\listtemplateid3\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid201\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listlevel\levelnfc4\levelnfcn4\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{lower-alpha\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid202\'02\'01.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li1440\lin1440 }{\listlevel\levelnfc23\levelnfcn23\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{square\}}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid203\'01\uc0\u9642 ;}{\levelnumbers;}\fi-360\li2160\lin2160 }{\listname ;}\listid3}
{\list\listtemplateid4\listhybrid{\listlevel\levelnfc0\levelnfcn0\leveljc0\leveljcn0\levelfollow0\levelstartat1\levelspace360\levelindent0{\*\levelmarker \{decimal\}.}{\leveltext\leveltemplateid301\'02\'00.;}{\levelnumbers\'01;}\fi-360\li720\lin720 }{\listname ;}\listid4}}
{\*\listoverridetable{\listoverride\listid1\listoverridecount0\ls1}{\listoverride\listid2\listoverridecount0\ls2}{\listoverride\listid3\listoverridecount0\ls3}{\listoverride\listid4\listoverridecount0\ls4}}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 IMPORTANT NOTIONS
\b0 \
\
Note, regarding the decision space problem, if this space is large then there is still no distinction between design time and runtime, also if the space is large then it means unknown. As at runtime one do not get any extra information\
\
\
1. if when environmental conditions change and all the degree of environmental conditions change is known, then only an adaptive system as there is dynamic but no runtime uncertainty. In this case, a lot of things can be taken to design time, including the modelings.\
\
2. if either when environmental conditions change, or all the degree of changes, or both is unknown, then we have self-adaptive system.  i.e., there are both dynamic and runtime uncertainty.\
\
2.1. if  all the degree of changes is known (unknow the other) (the decision space might still be large), then the modelings/reasoning (and anything that rely on the models) can be built/used offline - we just record the outputs based on rules/policy. For this, we will need online decision making at runtime , e.g.,  we can use rule-based approach (self-adaptive) but still, when to trigger which decision could be a runtime matter. If you do online, then the only benefit is probably only model/reason when necessary as some environmental condition might not encounter, but the benefit for taking this offline is more.\
\
2.2. otherwise, to use model at runtime is needed. (they can be built offline or online).\
\

\b IMPORTANT NOTIONS
\b0 \
\
\
1. tasks, deadline for the DAASE project? need hyper he rustics?\
\
no task, no deadline,  hyper heristic\
\
2. what direction? optimisation on software architecture, can we do in the context of self-adaptive systems and cloud computing?\
\
yes we can do this, can do on domain of self-adaptive system and cloud computing.\
\
\
3. how we can get company involve?\
\
a. company give us data, we run experiments/evaluations\
b. we delivery algorithms/tool to company for their daily software development/maintainace, we analyse the result in the end by e.g., interview.\
\
both are OK\
\
4. build a software/tool for the algorithm? \
\
for case study\
\
\
TODO\
\
problems, research questions, significance of the problem and possible solutions (runtime optimisation for self-adaptive software architecture)\
1. when to trigger the optimisation during adaptation\
\

\b Research questions:\
\
1) how to choose the features.\
2) how to ue technical debt to make reasoning\
3) if need ensemble or concept drift
\b0 \
\
a. technical debt to represent the long-term and short-term of decision.\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 b. multiple feedbacks, e.g., coming from human, and coming from the adaptable software, the direction stage. Classify the users and then see of trigger adaptation coresspondly. \cf0 \
\
2. resilient optimisation with respect to the constraints given by stakeholders. (or the other is try to find the range of constraints that can be stable, using dynamic technical debt) the result of too good or too bad requirement should be at least similar to the result of an rational requirement.\
\
Mitigating the effects of requirements uncertainty: xxxx optimisation for self-adaptive software architecture\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 Research questions:\
\
1) how to do multi objective optimisation for SAS architecture with mixed variables (inside knee v.s. outside knee)\
2) whether introducing constraints can tune multi objective optimisation (inside requirements v.s. outside requirements)\
3) how to mitigate requirement uncertainty\
     a. how to formulate the problem with requirements and their mitigation.\
     b. how to design multi objective optimisation that can consider requirements.\
     c. how is the resilience of the algorithm to requirements uncertainty.\
4) how to incorporate dynamics into the problem.
\b0 \
\
====================== MOEA SAS optimisation with FM and knee ======================\
feature guided and knee point focused multi-objective optimisation for self-adapting software architecture at runtime (we do not use FM as qos model and thus do not assume the effects of decision on goals!) FEMOSSA\
\
we can say the QoS model is also guided by the gene, which is a result of feature model. But it needs to additional consider environmental variables.\
\
if aim for fewer gene, which can lead to less computation effort in fitness evaluation. Also easier to be maintained. This aims to include only the feature, which has more than one optional value, so that they are only useful in evolution. This can distinguish us from classic 0/1 gene translation.\
\
we also want to project dependency to mutation and crossover separately. \
\
We can assume the given FM is correct, i.e., no dead feature, e.g., those that has both required/excluded on the same main.\
\
dependency: the optional range of one feature depends on the chosen value of others.\
\

\b CHALLENGE
\b0 \
\
\
\
1. how to perform optimisation with large search space at SAS runtime.\
 search-based algorithm, particularly EA, has been popular as exact solution does not scale, this raises: how to systematically and automatically model the problem to EA\
\
2. how to reason about trade-off in decision.\
\
3. how to find a knee point.\
\

\b LIMITATION
\b0 \
\
1. exact methods are easily adopt and they are design to handle dependency constraint, but they do not scale well. Other existing work rely on manual analysis and translation to EA, they do not consider dependency between features, as EA is not naturally design to handle dependency constraints., Althgouht some objective function (e.g., ML) one can distinguish valid/invlaid ones, letting the EA explore the entire search space would still waste evaluation and not prevent invalid solution in final population (affect optimisation quality). Whats worse, the solution may need to be corrected if no valid ones found, this might destroy the evolution history.\
\
FM has been used for the problem this help to systemically model control features and their dependency, some work has also marriage FM and EA, but they have further limitations when translate into EA thus cannot be used for our SAS problem at runtime:\
\
1. does not consider numeric feature explicitly.\
\
2. only consider categorical feature not numeric feature in the encoding of individual. If use the categorical encoding (0/1) to numeric that could rise more computational effort and harder the handle dependency. \
\
3. FM work also consider dependency, but do not explicitly  consider complex dependency, especially numeric ones, within the EA and search process to prevent violation, as EA is not naturally design to handle dependency constraints. Instead, they use dependency as an objective, which can find more valid solution but is still not completely resolve the problem and it is not suitable for SAS runtime as it introduces extra complexity. Also, all existing work do not prevent the exploration of invalid solution, even for the JSS paper on DSPL.\
\
In addition, they do not prevent the wasteful exploration of invalid solution and consider merely limited type of dependency.\
\
4. Weighted sum is limited as it is difficult to specify weights.To explore trade-off, some work use multi-objective optimisation.  But they rely on NSGA2, which is limited in diversity in finding trade-off decisions and thus the quality of decision\
\
5. knee point. No other has considered. Might lead to unbalanced decisions, which is normally not preferred.\
\

\b CONTRIBUTIONS
\b0 \
\
We use FM to express the SAS problem, then systematic and automatic translation of the problem FM in EA context.\
\
0. we consider numeric features and their dependency.\
\
1. automatically create new representation/encoding with reduced gene in EA from FM. (lower overhead and help to handle dependency)\
\
2. automatically extract dependency , based on the new representation of gene from FM, and inject them into mutation and crossover. (reduced search space so save function evaluation cycles for unwanted space, prevent invalid decisions, improve optimisation quality)\
\
3. MOEAD STM\
\
4 knee points.\
\
5 Create clear synergy between software engineering and evolutionary computation.\
\

\b manual steps:\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b0 \cf0 \
\
1. add numeric attributes and complex numeric dependency based on the scenario. (such dependency can be changed back to classic excluded)\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 numeric feature is the one that has more than one predefined and alternative children which have attributes of numeric value, and it has not other type of children. The children are regarded as categorical. (they have large children and can be used for mathematical comparison in dependency)\
\
if a feature A has numeric value but only one XOR children or not XOR, then than can only be considered as categorical, they are usually consider as MAN features. In case of dependency to numeric feature,  we simply restrict the range of the dependent numeric feature.\
\
all children range should be given, including 0. If the feature has 0 but with a core (no conditionally switch off), or with core (no conditionally switch off) but not 0, then it is false option design error.\cf0 \
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 automatic steps:
\b0 \
\
\
\
grow\
(parent = branch)\
\
0. Add numeric feature to a leaf. (no need as this is presented at the beginning )\
\
1. add switch on/off sub-feature to leaf which share OR operation\cf3  and has no children\cf0 . \cf4  and already has children\cf0 . \
\
2. add on to leaf whose do not share OR or ALT \cf5 and has no children\cf0 . \
\
\
\
3. add switch off, if optional and if the node is parent, then itself and its sub-parent need to add new sub-feauture repenting switch off. \
\
4. Add off to parent which share OR and ALT operation and to all its sub parents. \
\
\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf6 If we find a numeric feature that needs to be switch has no 0, or if the numeric feature has 0 but there is no way for it to switch off, then it is a design error (false option as some feature can be switch off but no such option).\cf0 \
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf4 5. add on to parent that is required by a cross dependency and do not have more than one ALT.\
(this can prevent complication when it only has OR children and it is optional)\cf0 \
\
prune \
\
1. remove parent who has less than one alternative leaf child (feature has no variability)\
2. link dependency to all children parents, if any. If no children, ensure that the dependency is always true.\
3. in-branch dependency would be inherited for the ones that has not been removed.\
\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 rule2:
\b0  \
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 feature model: branch feature with more than on ALT is gene, direct children as optional values which are mutual excluded. We then prune the other non-gene branch. (leaf is still in consideration but just not as gene)\cf7 Because i) they help to translate some leaf feature into selection as they can be considered as values ii) they cannot  be disregard as gene without affecting variability, causing some solution can not be explored. iii) Removing them can also affect adaptation and the design of actuators, as they cannot select as a constant  at design time and the solution would have not contained them.  \
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf8 Those branches can be pruned because they only have on (where do not have variability), on/off variability and by adding proper on/off XOR leaf our add rules ensure that their variability can be represented by their children.\
\
Because if it cannot turn on, it means none of its children can be selected, which means a design error.\
if it allow to turn off and cannot turn off, it means not all of its children can be deselected , which violate our rule. \cf7 \
\
Therefore, for those feature that removed, if they have actuators then we should only have on/off option, and they are fixed to on in the actual configurations and excluded from runtime adaptation (for XOR, we won't have only 0/1 for a branch, because this is the same as optional)\
\
The sensor/acuator of the gene are the ones that only will be triggered at runtime.\
\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf8 Since we prune some branches, we then need to restructure dependency for the pruned branch to preserve variability. \
\
Wothnting that our goal is not to find the min number gene, but to see a reduced number of gene than 0/1 representation, which is more suitable for SAS. in fact if xOR parent has all children as XOR parent, their variability can also be represented by its children, but this need much complex restructing of dependency for reducing only 1 gene.\cf0 \
\
\
then design sensor/acautor for each gene.\
\
once the genes are identified, we then can translate the dependency based on each gene.\
\
\
This will help to selected only the necessary features, as some features cannot be changed at runtime or they are duplicated and can be represented by some other features. Thus not even needed to be considered in the modelling.\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 rule3:
\b0   (extract dependency chain)\
\
DEPENDENCY\
\
numeric feature is only numeric, i.e., usually leaf, but it can have categorical dependency (CTC)\
categorical feature can only have categorical dependency\
\
(range-to-existence and existence-to-range are different under required! the former when non-exist the range cannot be selected, while the later can)\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf8 Range != to full range, as this would be the same as categorical, and this would be design error.\cf0 \
range = mathmatical constraint, e.g, =0 or >= 50 or\'85\
\
\
manual=explicit, otherwise implicit\
\
required\
\
categorical-required:  existence-to-existence (manual), selection-to-existence, existence-to-selection, selection-to-selection (in-branch or CTC)\
numeric-required (manual, \cf9 use exclude when translate into classic FM, can not be used with leaf feature\cf0 ): althematic, range-to-range, existence-to-range, range-to-existence, selection-to-range, range-to-selection. (CTC)\
\
\
excluded (only consider one way)\
\
categorical-excluded:  existence-to-existence (manual), selection-to-existence, existence-to-selection, selection-to-selection (CTC)\
numeric-excluded (manual, \cf9 use exclude when translate into classic FM, can not be used with leaf feature\cf0 ): althematic, range-to-range, existence-to-range, range-to-existence, selection-to-range, range-to-selection. (CTC)\
\
at-least-one-required (auto-convert CTC) to categorical OR group: existence-to-existence , existence-to-selection, existence-to-range\
\
at-least-one-exist  (auto-convert in-branch) within OR group (this is a weak dependency as it could be ensured by other siblings)\
\
no at-least-one-excluded as if the OR member is dependent then can be simply see on each one in isolation, and finally intersect. (might be do not have to mention this)\
\
more complex, e.g, conditional numeric dependency can be easily added.\
\
(\cf8 we do not have XOR which is represented by features, required and excluded cannot be placed on sty that can not be switch off. And no conradiction between features so to avoid closed loop dependency)\cf0 \
========\
\
-in branch dependency \
\
For each gene only:\
\
\
=============\
\
3 important notions:\
\
1.  those closest descendant genes $G$ of $F$, which follow each path from $F$ (vertical and horizontal)\
2. if $G$ has Mandatory relation to its parent and the path between $F$ and $G$ does not contain deselectable features  (vertical)\
3. $P$ is not a gene, and that there is no gene on the path from $P$ to $F$  (vertical (for OR) and horizontal) (for vertical OR, this can be change to if and acsent features are gene)\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf10 Horizontal (the first switch off non-madantory parent (when such parent is not gene, and the path from it to the target has no gene) of a given gene and such parent's next layer decent gene)\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
MAN - next layer decent gene 'required' on it. (if gene and can switch off)\
OPT - do nothing, as itself can control its own existence which has no affect to the other decent gene even if it is gene.\
ALT - same as OPT or MAN or OR, as variability/existence can be represented by root even if it is gene. The chain propagate till root, which is always MAN.\
OR - when it cannot have OR relation, then other next layer decent gene 'at-least-on-required' on it. (if gene, if not, then on its next layer decent gene) Otherwise do nothing as the OR relation ensures existence of the OR group.\
\
OPT, ALT and OR would always be able to be switch off.\
\
(MAN OPT does not need to consider the case of non-gene because their variability can be represented by children directly, while for ALT and OR, their children can only represent their variability after refactoring of dependency)\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf10 Vertical\cf0 \
\
Go down the tree from for each branch, ONLY NEED TO WORK ON THE NEXT LAYER (all gene as well as their children can be switch off except the Mandatory (depends))\
\
Optional - (if it is a gene) get all its children gene should be dependent of it.\
***Extraction - When dependent, the (can switch off and not under OR group) mandatory child gene ) we set "same_required" dependency, if the current parent gene is the first switch off non-mandatory  parent of that child. i.e., the path from such to the gene are all mandatory or cannot be switch off***\
\
ALT -  if not gene, all its children gene should be dependent of its parent, it also have same_required (selection-to-existence and (existence-to-selection, this is subject to ***Extraction)) dependency. If gene, itself depends on parent (selection-to-existence and existence-to-selection) , its next layer children depends on itself ((existence-to-existence , one or two ways) ).\
***Extraction - When dependent, the (can switch off and not under OR group) mandatory child gene ) we set "same_required" dependency, if the current parent gene is the first switch off non-mandatory  parent of that child. i.e., the path from such to the gene are all mandatory or cannot be switch off***\
\
Mandatory - (if it is a gene and it can switch off) then its children and all genes that share the same first parent, which can be switch off and non-mandatory , should be dependent of it, \cf5 itself also be deponent of the others. \cf0 (unless the first switch off non-mandatory parent is a gene) (due to rule 1, 2)\
***Extraction - When dependent (children or\cf8  \cf5 the dependents are OR group, whose root is the first switch off feature, then the mandatory one would have at-least-one-required dependency to OR group members)\cf0 , the (can switch off and not under OR group) mandatory child gene ) we set "same_required" dependency, if the current parent gene is the first switch off non-mandatory  parent of that child. i.e., the path from such to the gene are all mandatory or cannot be switch off***\
\
\
OR's children -, regardless if OR feature is gene, all OR group genes (and children genes) should have dependency (unless root of OR feature is optional and is not gene and the root is not the first switch off non-mandatory parent of any other mandatory children gene., \cf9 or if it is mandatory can be switch off then itself and its first \cf0 switch off non-mandatory \cf9 parent is not a gene and such parent \cf0 is not the first switch off non-mandatory parent of any other mandatory children gene\cf9 , otherwise it means that itself cannot control its existence. This is need to use together with Extraction and slibing dependency of Mandatory gene\cf0 ), sibling decenor of the same children of OR parent do not need such, but each of them need one for other OR member's   sibling decenor.\
\
Also, when the OR relation does not hold (because the root is optional or conditionally optional, means their variability can not be represented via the others and some direct dependency to them is needed), the other decent gene of the root's first switch off non mandatory feature (or can be itself if it is optional), need to have at-least-one-required to group member.\
\
if OR member's are not gene, then do nothing.\
\
every OR member's (if gene) children should depends on it. ***Extraction - When dependent, the (can switch off and not under OR group) mandatory child gene ) we set "same_required" dependency, if the current parent gene is the first switch off non-mandatory  parent of that child. i.e., the path from such to the gene are all mandatory or cannot be switch off***\
\
\
It is possible to see maintain dependency for OR group member without a central parent.\
\
(OR group can be directly use when it is dependent, when it is main, need special treatment) use union when it involve OR group! This is used when the OR group is main (except 'excluded') and itself cannot be siwthcoff, when the OR group is dependent, simply see as each group member as dependent.\
\
since numeric dependency does not concern existence, it has no effect on the at-least-one logic of OR group. when required, the OR group needs to be union, \
\
(while when excluded, the OR group needs to be intersected, simply as other excluded relation. \cf7 we can actually reverse the dependency in excluded thus it does not need special treatment) (because it mutation and cross over, the checking is double way!)\cf0 \
=============\
\
\
-cross branch dependency\
\
category to category dependency require/exclude\
category to numeric dependency l,r < > = with/without a numeric value: the numeric side has to be on parent. (if use those, it has to be on numeric parent, if based on it, it needs to use l,r)\
numeric to numeric dependency l,r < > = with/without a numeric value: has to have at least one side on parent. (if use those, it has to be on numeric parent, if based on it, it needs to use l,r)\
\
=============\
\
\
When they are remove mean they are not numeric and in a numeric dependency!\
\
DEPENDENT\
\
if dependent is parent, it then find gene by going down next layer, if it cannot go down find gene then it means the dependency can be removed.\
\
If for dependent, if the dependent is the leaf (this can not be numeric feature as it cannot be leaf) ,  then we move up one as the variability is represented by ALT on a parent. this is because\
1. the relation cannot be mandorty as this would make the dependency pointless.\
2. the relation cannot be optional as this would make the main as gene\
3. the relation cannot be in OR group  as this would make the main as gene\
4. it can only be in ALT group thus the parent will definitely the gene.\
\
MAIN \
\
if main is parent, it then find gene by going down next layer, if it cannot go down find gene then it means the dependency can be removed. \
\
need to consider 'required' when main in OR group\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf11 It should be noted that in cross dependency where the main is parent (include the category-numeric dependency) where the main can be switch off (or it is numeric), only the dependent one is possible to be removed due to Grow 5. (We assume that when required cross dependency, it has been checked that the main one can be switch off, otherwise there is no point to have such dependency.)\cf0 \
\
If for main, if the main is the leaf, (this can not be numeric feature as it cannot be leaf)  then we move up one as the variability is represented by ALT on a parent. this is because\
1. the relation cannot be mandorty as this would make the dependency pointless.\
2. the relation cannot be optional as this would make the main as gene\
3. the relation cannot be in OR group  as this would make the main as gene\
4. it can only be in ALT group thus the parent will definitely the gene.\
\
\
\
=============\
\
We now have the dependency graphic with redundant dependency.\
\
Some important points about dependency merging:\
\
To construct a combined value tree for a dependent gene, the dependencies, by which it is constrained, need to be merged one by one using set operations (union, intersection or subtraction) on the leaves from their value trees, where unions are always performed ahead of the others. \
\
1. Here, a single dependency between two genes represents the constraint on the dependent gene with respect to the conditions of main gene. The extracted dependencies and their imposed constraints are shown in Table.\
\
2. The constraint imposed by a dependency, according to Table,  can be expressed using a \\textbf\{\\emph\{value tree\}\}, where each leaf is a set of optional values constrained by the corresponding condition in branch, i.e., the selected values of main gene.\
\
\
3.  For a given dependent gene, if it has two or more dependencies with identical main genes, then the leaves of the branches, which represent the same condition, can be combined directly, and such a mergence would be always performed before the others. \
\
\
4. In case the dependencies have different main genes, all branch nodes of a single or already combined value tree are replicated and grafted to each right-most branch node of another single or already combined value tree, forming new levels for the finally combined value tree, representing the combinatorial conditions. Then, for the two value trees that were grafted, their leaves, whose original ancestors are now on the same path from root to a right-most node in the newly grafted tree, are combined to create the new leaf-set. The process stops when all related dependencies are merged and their value trees are grafted. \
\
5. To ensure correctness when merging in the presence of different main genes, the dependencies that require union are always merged ahead of the other operations, leading to a set of partially merged dependencies. Since each of them are merged from identical dependency type as shown in Table \\ref\{table:dependency-constraints\}, they can be then merged with each others (and the remaining single dependencies) using the set operations as if they are single dependencies. \
\
\
for numeric gene, the 0 does not only mean its numeric value is set to 0, but also refer to the feature is 'turned off', which will have no further effects on the SAS. Thus, when empty set caused by numeric feature, fixing 0 can help to prevent effects, even if such 0 literally break dependency.\
\
----------\
given correct FM, in double side numeric dependency and they can be switch off, when (the could happen when required_less and excluded_greater_or_equals operator) the main is switch off and the alrithmic calculation lead to empty set, we then fix a 0 to represent that it can only be switch off (if one can switch off, then both should be able to be switch off otherwise it is a design error)! Unless specify in range-to-range (other empty set cases are design error)\
\
Then merge all dependency with the same main/dependent on the graphic to make a simpler graphic for mutation and crossover. (when value change, transit back to its dependents to check, if fine then stop, if needs change then change it and repeat this process.)\
\
Then union following by intersection on a gene that has more than one dependency to build the value net. (select valid value) (mutation need only deponents while crossover needs both main and dependents)\
\
mutation: when mutate check dependent upon mutate, mutate itself when violation of dependent found, stop when no violations. (the original mutation operator would mutate it regardless if it has been mutated due to dependency violation). Since we assume correct/validated FM, there will be always a state that no violation on dependency, even with closed loop.\
\
crossover: when crossover check itself/dependent when swap, swap main/dependent when violation of itself/dependent found and it has not been swapped, stop when no violations or all has been swapped. (the original crossover operator would swap it only if it has been not been previously swapped due to dependency violation)\
\cf12 \
=============\
Need to ensure every dependency leads to at least one value! \cf4 We also need to check looped (unless it does not involve numeric dependency, as categorical dependency all share 0 )dependency. Normally we should not have one, although it might not cause any issue. if we have, alert the people to check it and ensure that there is an end.\cf12  (we just assume that the closed loop will be checked by existing tool and grantee a correct FM!, because if this happen, then it is likely to be a design error in the model to avoid, e.g.,  dead features, \cf13 unwanted conditionally dead features\cf12  and contradiction on feature dependency, we do not consider conditionally dead as it will consider XOR as design error)\
\
Since the FM is correct, then every single dependency would have a set of values, before intersection.\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf2 in althematic for, when less-required it can have empty is impossible as this would mean that the main's 0 feature is a dead feature, thus an design error.\cf12 \
\
There is a special case where intersection lead to 0 even with a correct FM, i.e., when other dependency intersect with at-least-one-exist  e.g.,\cf0 , \cf12  , OR group member has other dependent other than at-least-one-exist, it could lead to empty set when all main set to 0. This is not a design error but the fact that the at-least-one-exist is a weak dependency and sometime contradict with the others, and the straight intersection does not aware of it. \cf13 fact they have not considered priority/order,\cf12  if this occurs, we see the other dependency (higher order) has higher priority thus set a 0, as this can be ensured by the siblings or the parent can be conditionally/directly deselected (this can also be directly optional as in such case it is possible to still have an at-least-one-exist dependency ). This still complain with the logic.  \cf13 as the lower order dependency would be pointless to ensure if the higher order one is violated. \cf12 Because in a correct FM, . For OR group, if all the member has such dependency (or different ones), then the dependency should be at their parent level. Otherwise, it is fine to set 0 as even if the at-least-one-exist of such member is violated, it can be enforced by other member due to the looped dependency chain.  Both case using the other dependency as higher priority preserve the same logic.\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf14 (it is impossible to have a case where each OR group member independently required different feature and the root cannot be switch off, as this is a design error: unwanted conditionally dead feature) (this is the same as all member required the same feature)\cf12 \
\
(For ALT and OR parent, we cannot have all their children can be switch off while not themselves (neither directly or conditionally), as this is the same as a MAN required another optional, which is false option design error)\
\
(they should be able to switch off as they have required/exclude relation)\
\
(other cases should be design error, and they should not occur as we assume correct validation on the FM. Also, if the categorical/mathematical comparison of single dependency lead to empty options, this can be a design error as well)\
\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Some important points about dependency aware operators:\
\
1. For mutation, the requisition ensure that it goes to the depth first.\
\
2. For crossover, the order follows: dependent genes - main genes on one offspring and then do the same to another offspring. It also goes to the depth first. \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf12 \
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf15 when a required to deselected (and only, i.e., 0, especially for numeric feature) and other dependency lead to null, then put only 0 (switch off) because it cannot satisfy any both dependency but choose to disable it, in some case, this still represent the valid dependency in the FM, e.g.,:\
\
at-least-one-exist has an extreme case where a OR group member depends on other feature that require itself to deselected, then when the other OR group member are deselected, the intersection leads to null. In such case, we see the other dependency has higher priority (ignore the at-least-one-exist temporarality) as the OR group does not valid if it does not satisfy other dependency.\
\
two cases (same rule apply when multiple other dependency and OR group members):\
\
when all OR group member has other dependency, then it means there is case that OR group can be switch off, thus such solution does not violate. (the key entry feature can be switch off)\
\
when no all OR group member has other dependency, then the group member that does not has extra dependency would enforce the at-least-one-exist, because of OR group in branch enforcement. (the key entry feature can be switch off)\
\
In other case, e..g, c > a and c < b the null would occur when there is possible to have the combination of a > b, then in such case, it is likely to be a design error. (the key entry feature cannot be switch off) (but this should not occur as we assume that the FM is analysed/correct/validated by an existing approach )\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf12 \
=============\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf5 other cases would likely to be an error. Extraction - need to ensure intersection is not null (for numeric dependency), \
-----------\cf0 \
\
EXPERIMENTS\
\
(for all other competitors, even with ML based QoS models that are expected to distinguish valid/invalid solution and hoping to guild search properly, this would still wast function evaluation effort and no guarantee the final population would have valid results..) (when we use their alias, we refer to their optimisation part)\
\
our QoS model takes all feature values, even for invalid ones.\
\
for comparing 0/1 (It is unfair to evaluate a model with many dimension of inputs, in function evaluation, we convert them into the representation of QoS model in evaluation. But this need additional method to deal with the dimension mismatching: for XOR use the first 1, if no 1, randomly select one), which will actually help to distinguish valid/invalid solution.  This will actually help to distinguish valid/invalid solution in terns of numeric dependency (search space remain the same)\
\
for DUSE and Plato, since they use manually set representation, we can just set they the same as our representation.\
\
The Fusion one need 0/1and consider categorical dependency in to the exact algorithm, which is naturally allowed to handle dependency constraints.(It is unfair to evaluate a model with many dimension of inputs, , in function evaluation,  we convert them into the representation of QoS model in evaluation, ). This is directly possible without other strategy as categorical dependency, i.e., XOR, has been ensured. This will actually help to distinguish valid/invalid solution in terns of numeric dependency (search space remain the same)\
\
We filter/correct dependency first and then non-dominated ranking and then the requirement. So for population based one, the final would grantee to be valid if the final population contains value.\
\
\
-dependency can be also related to another numeric dependency, e.g., max connection <= max thread if one connection per thread mode is chosen. This differ the case where a dependency is placed between connection and mode, as the former represent if the mode is not chosen, then the numeric dependency does not exist; the latter means if it is not chosen, then connection can not be chosen either.\
\
\cf5 if the leaf has dependency then it move to the dependency of its parent, which is a gen. (this is impossible to occur)\cf0 \
\
the final dependency is an intersection of the dependency for more than one main features.\
\
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\li720\fi-720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls1\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	\'95	}Software stack vs. software\
\pard\tx220\tx720\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\li720\fi-720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\ls2\ilvl0\cf0 {\listtext	\'95	}fine-grained configurations (both numeric and categorical feature) vs. coarse-grained. \
{\listtext	\'95	}design EMO based on feature model. (representation of individual, 0/1 representation cause larger overhead and difficult to handle dependency.Therefore, we need shorter representation that still preserve\cf2  variability of the software\cf0 ). Others needs complex manual analysis.\
{\listtext	\'95	}consider logical dependency, so proactively avoid the wrong values vs. find the values then evaluate using constraint functions. (categorical (on categorical feature) and numeric  (on numeric feature) dependency). 
\b numeric dependency
\b0  could be between numeric features or between numeric and categorical features. (dependency in mutation and crossover)\
{\listtext	\'95	}better optimisation algorithm vs. NSGA-II.\
{\listtext	\'95	}find keen points vs. find pareto front.\
{\listtext	\'95	}exact algorithm's assumption about linear model, convex problem make them difficult to find optimal result in our problem; or they may take a very long time to do so.\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
When mutation, change with dependency and check all the dependent variables are correct, if not change it. Do the same for every change.\
\
When crossover, check all the dependent variables are correct, if not, swap it. Do the same for every change.\
\
when not consider dependency, the result need to ensure at least the software is funciontaly correct, e.g., no exception is thrown.\
\
Challenges:\
\
dynamic and uncertainty\
large search space\
\
no systematic design of individuals \
no systematic projection of dependency to mutation and crossover]\
\
the above two means no systematic and automatic approach to translate to SAS problem to MOEA/EA\
\
no knee point, need to pick one form pareto front.\
\
use numerical control variables and categorical control variables\
\
\
if the requirements are too good, can make search difficult which in turn trigger many adaptations.\
If the requirements are too bad, can not provide enough pressure to search which in turn lead to the scenario where the requirements are always satisfied but it is far away from optimal (cf. compare with an search without requirements)\
\
requirements can have two ways in optimisation (not constraints satisfaction): 1) as weights 2) as constraints\
\
We set the environmental variables as one interval behead, so that the models have a limited look ahead ability (the can be beneficial, e.g., workload becomes larger and larger, or it becomes larger and then smaller). Otherwise, the model would have to assume that the future workload is the same (or similar) as current one, which is unrealistic some time as the environments changes even during decision making process. \
\
When the cost is price related to provision, we still need to use demand for training semi-control knobs otherwise incorrect adaptation decision might be used as samples. Then in prediction, the predicted value becomes a worst bound. This is aim for learning the true correlation.\
\
When the cost is energy related to the actual usage, we can use provision for training as only the actual energy consumption matters.\
\
======== new ========\
\
we explicitly consider numeric features because:\
\
(i) it provides simpler and more intuitive design; in addition, there is less number of dependency when compared to not considering them or reduce them back to categorical features. This will also simply our dependency extraction process for injecting them into mutation and crossover operators of MOEA, as if they are bring to the extraction and merging, this would lead to a value tree with high depth, which affect the overhead of dependency aware operators at runtime. (but we have to reduce them back to categorical when do FM validation)\
\
(ii) As in classic approach, those feature, if not distinguished from categorical ones, will need to reduce to categorical feature, in which case the children of numeric feature would need to be encoded as gene. As mentioned, this will largely increase the dimensionality in the optimisation causing curse of dimensionality. Therefore, explicitly consider numeric features can provide us with the foundation to design novel and better encoding of chromosome representation, as we will show in Section.\
\
comparing K/D and FEMOSAA:\
\
no dependency defiantly worse,\
no knee might not been seen as imbalanced as sometime it is bias to one objective (large degrade one while slight improve another) while sometimes it is to another.  In contrast,  our knee approach bias to one objective (large improve one while slight degrade another) while sometimes it is to another., it could actually lead to overall better result.\
\
the same when compare KD and K/D, but they are not statistical significant as the effect of one is obsculated by the lack of another.\
\
\
scalability on dependency aware operators:\
\
1. how many dependency in a chain:\
\
this actually has minimal impact as the chain will stop if a gene satisfy the dependency. Work even better on simpler dependency, e.g., require.\
\
2. a gene has how many main (dependent) genes\
\
this can affect the correction and validation about if the gene violate dependency, however, as shown in the most complex linux model, this can has only up to 22 features in extreme case - this number is even smaller for SAS.\
\
\
I contrast to other work in FM, the elitists feature has also provide FEMOSAA with faster way to prevent invalid solution and we guarantee no invalid solution would be produced.\
\
\
\
====================== MOEA SAS optimisation with FM and knee ======================\
\
\
=================== comparing online and offline learning based performance modelings for SAS ===================\
\
they are both incremental (different from performance modelings in SPL, modelings in SAS needs to consider the changing environment, which cause dynamic and uncertainty)\
\
1. define the characteristics that distinguish on/offline learning.\
2. identify if we focus the modelings particularly for the performance modelings, or we from a general machine learning perspective (see what have been concluded), and conclude something different for the performance modelings problem. (see what has been missing in the general conclusion of machine learning perspective) \
\
=================== comparing online and offline learning based performance modelings for SAS ===================\
\
=================== Imbalanced aware performance modelings ===================\
\
\
Imbalanced aware performance modelings for SAS at runtime\
\
fully-incremental (train h+n) vs partialy-incremental (train model+n)\
\
=================== Imbalanced aware performance modelings ===================\
\
\
\
\
\
====================== When to adapt using TD and ML ======================\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\b \cf0 CHANLLENGE
\b0  \
\
how to determine the best and the most economic efficient time to adapt. The actual effect of adaptation/decision making process is again dynamic and uncertain, causing the payoff of adaptation difficult to known.\
\
\

\b LIMITATIONs
\b0  \
\
1. the periodically adaptation one might influence the SAS too much, as sometime this might make the SAS even worse given the stochastic behaviour of some decision making approaches. \
\
In addition, adaptation is also costly in terms of energy and decision making time.\
\
2. the threshold driven one might adapt the SAS too little, as sometime the adaptation when SAS is ok could further improve the SAS, leading to less server violation on requirements in the next times.\
\
Solution? adapt when the the benefit (payoff) is justify. \
\
\

\b CONTRIBUTIONS
\b0 \
\
\
1. Propose adaptation debt, and map the problem using debt analysis\
\
2. the debt analysis serves as expert judgement in the learning model\
\
3. Create clear synergy between software engineering and machine learning. In addition, we consider economic theory. \
\
\
Adaptation debt,\
\
AD occurs when the SAS chooses not to adapt. However, bear in mind that even if SAS chooses to adapt, the expected payoff is not guaranteed, due to the dynamic and uncertain nature of the environment, and depending on the decision making approach.\
\
B = \'a3 payoff of adaptation\
C = \'a3 cost of adaptation\
P = \'a3 penalty of requirement violation\
\
Principle = C, Interest  = P (or B).\
\
to adapt, utility1 = C + B if B is negative or C - B otherwise (likely better than original P)\
not to adapt, utility2 = P\
\
expert decision = comparing utility1 and utility2.  for both to adapt and not to adapt could actually result in debt, positive debt \
\
can apply to case where there is or no violation, as if there is no violation, the interest become negative, which represent some existing benefit\
\
the cumulative of debt depends on the sampling interval, e.g., debt will be cumulative till the next sampling interval.\
\
it is also worth to train the model when no adaptation occurs.\
\
(track the workload so consider cumulative effects?, this might be possible, but require prediction on the changes caused by environment, we currently one consider the current tilmestep, will leave it for future work)\
\
we consider not only the transient effects but also the actual payoff of adaptation mechanism \
\
\
the cost can be either decision making delay or execution delay, the former would lead to only one model whereas the latter can have n model, where n is the number of decision cluster that have significantly different delay.\
\
extension:\
\
1. change the interest formula\
2. consider long-term during comparison of debt?\
3. consider accumulated debt (need to avoid dominated by outliers) and use the most similar one from historical data in case of unobersivable case?\
\
====================== When to adapt using TD and ML ======================\
\
\
== Combing goal model and machine learning model in MOEA with two population ======\
\
\
== Combing goal model and machine learning model in MOEA with two population ======\
\
\
== Optimising the control features in SAS using EA with different stages: optimise important/more sensitive ones first ======\
\
\
== Optimising the control features in SAS using EA with different stages: optimise important/more sensitive ones first ======\
\
\
========== better explore the information of requirements in optimisation for SAS ==========\
\
\
3 strands:\
\
1) build EA that can better exploit the information of requirement, we can then test if different requirement setup (value) can lead to different results, and if different formulation of the different requirement implication can lead to different results, and then it is indeed better than purely objective\
2) given 1), we can evolve the requirement specification as well, in such a way that it is relaxed/tighten to affect the evolutionary search.\
3) given 1) and 2), we can do a co-evolution between requirement specification and the adaptation decisions.\
4) solve many objectives via domain driven objective/goal decomposition.\
\
\
for the point 1):\
two types of soft goal:\
i. objectives which is definitely fuzzy, which means we want it as better as possible but we do not know what is the best. In this case, no domain information is given.\
2. satisfaction which could be either crispy or fuzzy, we do not interest more than a threshold\
- response time < 5 means we definitely want it to be less than 5\
- response time < 5 could mean we expect it to be < 5 but would allow a certain level of violation\
\
In this case, information is expressed in that crispy or fuzzy threshold.\
\
for 2, we can also distinguish between if we see the objective value better than the threshold are different or the same.\
\
Evaluation:\
single objective\
1. check if each fitness function and the tailored EA fulfil the requirement statement.\
use generation of max/min value for single objective, use line plotting, this can also investigate the search pressure. \
2. check if the implication relation between requirement statement can still be reflected in the optimisation results.\
check if when putting the solutions of population found by one proposition, and put them into the fitness of another one, to see if the (mean) original and fuzzy value still comply with the implication relation. (this needs to be down both way), use box plot\
or we simply use the box plot of original value?\
3. check if the requirement value can have implication.\
4. overhead/scalability wise\
\
muti objective\
1. check relaxation, similar to 2) but w.r.t all objectives\
\
first priority is to meet the constraint, then if we can do better, go better, otherwise stick with it.\
\
\
\
\
\
NEW\
\
\
\
1. when given an imprecise requirement, only satisfaction is matter, so we need to map optimality with satisfaction:\
 - contribute to different generic requirement proposition, which describe different preferences\
 - contribute to transposing the imprecise requirement proposition into the precise fitness function, which express the mapping between optimality and satisfaction.\
\
2. when reason about which requirement proposition to use, we need i) information about the degree of optimality (theoretical and practical) and ii) domain preference\
\
3. we report on the practically resulted degree of optimality, because this is the data that will be monitored by the software engineers and they can better express the discrepancy for results under different requirement propositions. More importantly, as we will show, analyzing the practically resulted degree of optimality can provide in-depth information to assist the software engineer in selecting the proper requirement propositions.\
\
========== better explore the information of requirements in optimisation for SAS ==========\
\
========== requirements considering naive software engineers ==========\
\
========== requirements considering naive software engineers ==========\
\
\
========== optimise important feature first ==========\
\
========== optimise important feature first ==========\
\
========== better explore the requirement about relation between objectives for EA to optimise for SAS ==========\
\
\
Extracting the requirement documents to learn about AND and OR relation between objectives/goals.\
\
\
========== better explore the requirement about relation between objectives for EA to optimise for SAS ==========\
\
\
================ allow some invalid solution can be better?  (for both soft, requirement and hard dependency constraints?) ================\
\
\
******** for hard constraints on dependency **********\
\
\
DYNAMIC AND UNCERTAINTY\
\
the usefulness of invalid solution in the search is dynamic and uncertain, thus difficult to exploit.\
\
\
CHALLENGE:\
\
1. how to identify which invalid solutions tends to be useful under dynamic and uncertainty?\
2. how to exploit this useful information to better steer the search for better solutions?\
\
LIMITATION:\
\
0. consider all invalid solution found\
1. consider all invalid solution found, but with special treatment (penalty and remove)\
2. get rid of all invalid solution (dependency aware and repair)\
\
1. use 2 populations: 1 for valid solution another for invalid one\
2. use operator twice: one is the dependency aware to produce valid ones while the other is to produce valid/invalid ones.\
\
\
three criteria when selecting individual for the invalid population:\
\
1. violation of dependency\
2. similarity to each other\
3. similarity to valid solution\
\
In 1, we can compare the number of violated gene, if this equal, then compare the genes that have the least number of main genes.\
\
OR might be sort out 1 using the probability that an invalid one being change to valid one? based on dependency chain and value tree?\
\
******** for hard constraints on dependency **********\
\
================ allow some invalid solution can be better? (for both soft, requirement and hard dependency constraints?)   ================\
\
\
================ Combing rules and MOEA/EA? ================\
fuzzy principle?\
\
Another promising idea is to embed domain knowledge in the preproduction operation, e.g., using clusters, information theory, to provide a probability in the changes.\
\
================ Combing rules and MOEA/EA? ================\
\
================ A better seeding strategy for MOEA? ================\
\
STRAND 1\
\
compare different seeding strategy for self-adaptive service composition, getting inspirations from SPL and testing community. (we do not mutate the seeds, as they will be mutated during reproduction anyway)\
\
seeding strategy:\
\
1. single aggregated objective optimisation of single seed, using single seed to generate a population of individuals.\
\
2. single objective optimisation or a maximisation of a single objective, using single seed to generate a population of individuals.\
\
3. randomly chosen a population of individuals from previous multi-objective optimisation runs (who\'92s basic concrete services have some differences)\
\
4. randomly chosen a population of individuals from previous multi-objective optimisation runs, and contains only the non-dominated individuals (who\'92s basic concrete services have some differences)\
\
As a baseline, we can use half-to-half strategy for mutual comparisons.\
\
Each strategy will allow to set a parameter n (0<=n<=population size), representing how many individuals are initialised by seeds.\
\
\
How to evaluate?\
\
\
STRAND 2\
\
Use previously good adaptation decision as seed?\
\
we can use correlation to measure a control feature and objective, those harmonic feature should be change first, e.g., it should be at least higher than the current value. those trade-off ones can be adjust as usual.\
\
\
2 ranking: 1 based on similarity to current circumstances, 2: objective values. 1 times 2 to get a final rank\
\
we can also control a ratio to control the percentage of seed and randomised solutions.\
\
================  A better seeding strategy for MOEA?================\
\
\
\
================ Selecting the best data sample for learning? ================\
\
Samples around the critical areas should be learnt a bit more\
\
================  Selecting the best data sample for learning?================\
\
================ monitoring ================\
\
\
How to achieve better monitoring? e.g, just sense the data as the SAS runs or actively force some adaptation in order to collect data?\
\
When it is possible to do design time testing to collect data, then we can do. If not, we do pure at runtime by using random or even naive adaptation (we never try EVERY possible adaptation decision and environment conditions). The data can be feed into modeller, the hypothesis is that by using a small number of sample the learning algorithm should be able to learn the underlying concept and generalise it to unseen cases. Also, the model can be consolidated as new data become available, as a result of adaptation or a result of normal running status.\
\
\
may be we need to try at least one optional value once (without combination)\
\
explore vs exploit issue might be only related to when people formulate the problem as a whole using RL. When formulate as supervised online learning, we just use the data what we have without affect the SAS only for getting more information/sample. We only expect the model to be accurate/work for a limited period of time not for the entire time series, but it will be adapt as time changes.\
\
The RL needs to influence the system to get data, and it has curse of dimensionality issues. Depending on the method to update value function, if it uses temporal differences, then it is actually only consider reward for next tilmestep.\
\
RL itself cannot foreseen/predict something (unless random), so it needs to affect the physical systems just in order to gather data, also, its state table could have stability issues or could lose information.\
\
\
What if some feature is categorical e.g., different cache mode? do we really need to try them one by one in sampling? i.e., less sampling more accurate model\
\
using GAN to automatically generate sample without actually affecting the SAS?\
\
================ monitoring ================\
\
\
\
3. static optimizations (need short and efficient) vs. continuous dynamic optimisation (might be able to tolerate longer running time)\
4. optimisation at the meta-level of self-adaptive system, i.e., switch on/off components\
5. applying search space reduction techniques? e.g., the Simplex optimisation in J.Rao\'92s work\
\
\
\
Embedding Computational Intelligence in Self-Adaptive Software Systems and their application in cloud autoscaling.\
\
1. explain SAS\
2. explain challenge on dynamic and uncertainty\
3. explain CI is promising for those, but need to understand how and which problem of SAS to work.\
\
\
\
================ EPSRC grant ideas ================\
\
large scale modelings of SAS\
\
dynamic decision making under high variability\
\
\
The synergy between SE method and computational intelligence can be seen as human in the loop for self-adaptive software systems? \
\
ecology inspired adaptation in multi-taneted competing environment.\
\
Adaptations as utility/a service\
\
\
\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97 discussion with RAMI \'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\
\
1 day:\
\
Project 1: co-evolutions in multi-tenant self-adaptive software systems\
\
- cooperation and competition between software tenants and software provider.\
- different clusters of tenants.\
- co-evolution means change the SLA (SLA requirements or clusters of tenants) and change the software itself/business model. This aims for more compliance/zero violation.\
\
\'97\'97\
\
2 day:\
\
multiple layers of co-evolutions\
\
two types of co-evolutions: \
1. vertical co-evolutions (we have cooperation here), there are two populations: SLA statement and the software adaptation decision\
2. horizontal co-evolutions  (we have competition here), there are n populations where n is the number of tenant clusters. Each population here is the combination of SLA statement and the software adaptation decision.\
\
Proceed with the assumption that the self-adaptive software can be instantiated for different clusters of tenants.\
\
\
Example: Feature-Based Application Development and Management of Multi-Tenant Applications in Clouds\
\
\
\
\'97\'97\
\
3 day:\
\
vertical for SLA statement\
\
Objective 1: more meaningful SLA, which does not suffer from inflated and deflated promise i.e., more realistic SLA.\
\
\
\
\
1. look at co-evolution benefit in EA \
\
\
\
\
\
\
\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97 discussion with RAMI \'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\
\
\
================ EPSRC grant ideas ================\
\
\
A fundamental different of the RL, BN and case based reasoning to search based optimisation is that they cannot explore or reason about effect of decision on quality attribute, at least without affecting the SAS. They often make decision based on historical data, without the ability to do generalisation. So that there is an implicit search without explicit guidance.\
\
Event if sufficient/all data is obtained, the problem is still to search for the best case that most similar to given one with best utility - again is an search based optimisation problem.\
\
\
SU can quantify dynamic change of relevance, even in case where the effect could come from another feature, but we expect this is on minority. (may be this can be consider as redundancy as the effect of a feature is hidden by another). A more accurate way may be to consider multi-var formula, which is quite expensive. Thus, we use linear combination, summation, to combine and this can reach similar result or even better than the multi-var formula, back up by theoretical proof form the MRMR paper.\
\
\
Q1: explore vs exploit in RL and CBR?\
Q2: better sampling method?\
\
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl280\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf16 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
22\'a0Yelverton\'a0Drive\
Edgbaston,\'a0Birmingham\'a0B15\'a03NT\
Phone:\'a00121\'a04547694\'a0(home).\'a007990787421\'a0(my\'a0mobile)\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl440\sa108\partightenfactor0

\f2\fs36 \cf17 \cb18 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
High-Level Goals\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl480\sa300\partightenfactor0

\fs32 \cf17 What constitutes good research is a tough questions, which is why the most common deliverable of our work are peer-reviewed articles, to allow a community of researchers to decide what good research is and to 
\b evolve
\b0  the \'93definition\'94 of good research. The list below will help you please reviewers, which will help you attract more readers and iteratively lead to better research. Try to think of the list from both sides: Sometimes you are reviewed, sometimes you are the reviewer. Why was your article accepted in the past? Why was your article rejected in the past? What did you review in the past that you liked? What did you review in the past that you disliked?\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl440\sa108\partightenfactor0

\fs36 \cf17 Checklist\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl480\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0
\b\fs32 \cf17 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	1.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Your abstract is your paper.
\b0  Write your abstract in such a way that it condenses the paper, the whole paper, and nothing but the paper (so help me God). Having one abstract sentence per paper section is a good start.\cb1 \
\ls3\ilvl0
\b \cb18 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	2.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Your introduction is your paper.
\b0  Write your introduction in such a way that it condenses the paper, the whole paper, and nothing but the paper. Having one introduction paragraph per paper section is a good start.\cb1 \
\ls3\ilvl0
\b \cb18 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	3.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Problem statement and contributions must be on the first page.
\b0  Otherwise you put the reviewer in a bad mood and risk getting your article rejected. \'93Why the heck should I bother reading the other 9 pages of this article?\'94\cb1 \
\ls3\ilvl0
\b \cb18 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	4.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Do you clearly distinguish {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Problem_statement"}}{\fldrslt \cf19 problem statement}}, {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Research_question"}}{\fldrslt \cf19 research question}} and {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hypothesis"}}{\fldrslt \cf19 hypothesis}}?
\b0  You might not have separate heading for each one of them, but they must be clear in your head! If you have any doubts about the terms, please read the associated Wikipedia articles.\cb1 \
\ls3\ilvl0
\b \cb18 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	5.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
How do you test your hypothesis?\
\pard\tx940\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-1440\sl480\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl1\cf17 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	a.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Mathematical proofs
\b0 :\
\pard\tx1660\tx2160\pardeftab720\li2160\fi-2160\sl480\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl2
\b \cf17 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9642 
\f2 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Principle
\b0 : Formulate some axioms and derive conclusions.\cb1 \
\ls3\ilvl2
\b \cb18 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9642 
\f2 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Pros
\b0 : Mathematics is the only way to prove that something is true, the other methods bring evidence.\cb1 \
\ls3\ilvl2
\b \cb18 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9642 
\f2 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Cons
\b0 : The chosen axioms might not be useful (e.g., assume the speed of light was infinite) or the proof might be intractable.\cb1 \
\pard\tx940\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-1440\sl480\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl1
\b \cf17 \cb18 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	b.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Analyzing existing data
\b0 :\
\pard\tx1660\tx2160\pardeftab720\li2160\fi-2160\sl480\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl2
\b \cf17 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9642 
\f2 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Principle
\b0 : Pick existing data (e.g., Wikipedia traces), analyse it and derive conclusions.\cb1 \
\ls3\ilvl2
\b \cb18 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9642 
\f2 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Pros
\b0 : You can make strong statements about the phenomenon that the data captured. Notice that this is only evidence and not a proof! You might also do convincing projections or use data to make other hypothesis testing more convincing (see below).\cb1 \
\ls3\ilvl2
\b \cb18 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9642 
\f2 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Cons
\b0 : Existing data does not help test \'93what if\'94 scenarios. Also, any interpolations and extrapolations you make might may look subjective and unreasonable (since the price per GB halves every 18 months, storage costs will become negligible in 2020).\cb1 \
\pard\tx940\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-1440\sl480\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl1
\b \cf17 \cb18 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	c.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
User studies
\b0 : Pick n people and ask them something about your system. Very useful to quantify subjective issues, such as website responsiveness. Rarely used in systems research. See Raft as a very good example of how to test the hypothesis \'93A is easier to understand than B\'94.\cb1 \
\ls3\ilvl1
\b \cb18 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	d.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Simulation (\'93simulated\'94 experiments)
\b0 :\
\pard\tx1660\tx2160\pardeftab720\li2160\fi-2160\sl480\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl2
\b \cf17 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9642 
\f2 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Principle
\b0 : Create a system that abstracts a real system, i.e., it implements the important behaviour of the real system relative to the problem. For example, two 3D matrices of temperature and humidity with some equations could simulate whether in Ume\'e5.\cb1 \
\ls3\ilvl2
\b \cb18 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9642 
\f2 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Pros
\b0 : Generally quick to build, quick to explore many initial conditions. Can explore systems that are not yet or not easily available (e.g., telco clouds).\cb1 \
\ls3\ilvl2
\b \cb18 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9642 
\f2 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Cons
\b0 : Hard to get right. What are the important behaviours of the real system? For example, popular network simulators have failed to capture all important behaviours of networks.\cb1 \
\pard\tx940\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-1440\sl480\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl1
\b \cf17 \cb18 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	e.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Emulation (\'93real\'94 experiments)
\b0 :\
\pard\tx1660\tx2160\pardeftab720\li2160\fi-2160\sl480\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl2
\b \cf17 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9642 
\f2 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Principle
\b0 : Create a system that is as close as possible to the real system. Some parts are emulated, i.e., their externally observable behaviour cannot be distinguished from a real part. For example, a network emulator can produce latencies and bandwidths typically found in the Internet. A workload generator can produce requests similar to human users with a browser.\cb1 \
\ls3\ilvl2
\b \cb18 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9642 
\f2 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Pros
\b0 : Emulation can be a shortcut to getting the important behaviour of the real system right, e.g., latency spikes due to hardware energy saving, but there is no guarantee. In some communities, real experiments can be more convincing.\cb1 \
\ls3\ilvl2
\b \cb18 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9642 
\f2 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Cons
\b0 : Experiments can be tedious to set up, difficult to reproduce and easy to bias. Also they tend to be highly time-consuming, unless you somehow emulate time. :D\cb1 \
\pard\tx940\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-1440\sl480\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl1
\b \cf17 \cb18 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	f.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Production
\b0 :\
\pard\tx1660\tx2160\pardeftab720\li2160\fi-2160\sl480\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl2
\b \cf17 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9642 
\f2 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Principle
\b0 : Deploy a new system in production. E.g., \'93We replace the file-system of our university mail server with Btrfs.\'94\cb1 \
\ls3\ilvl2
\b \cb18 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9642 
\f2 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Pros
\b0 : Nobody can contest realism, usefulness, etc.\cb1 \
\ls3\ilvl2
\b \cb18 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	
\f3 \uc0\u9642 
\f2 	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Cons
\b0 : Highly unlikely to be accepted by operators, except if the system is in beta or the users are desperate for a solution to their problem (consider founding a start-up in the latter case :D).\cb1 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl480\sa300\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0\cf17 \cb18 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	6.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Consider combining these approaches, i.e., simulation on a large problem space, then real experiments to validate the simulation.\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl480\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl0
\b \cf17 \cb18 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	7.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Are you embedding your solution or experiment in the problem statement?
\b0  Of course, your experiments should be based on the problem statement, but make sure you did not change the problem statement to favour or simplify your experiments.\cb1 \
\ls3\ilvl0
\b \cb18 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	8.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Is your experiment capturing the important aspects of the problem?
\b0  If your problem is network latency and your state-of-the-art, feature-rich cloud simulator has no support for network latencies, then it is useless. Similarly, network emulators might not produce precise network latencies.\cb1 \
\ls3\ilvl0
\b \cb18 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	9.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
What are the limitations of your hypothesis testing?
\b0  Will your solution work if the number of servers is increased 100-fold? What if you use a 100Gbps network instead of the 1Gbps in your experiments. Do not get demoralised, but rather find strength in arguments: \'93The usefulness of our empirical evaluation may be diminished with the commercialization of new cloud services. [\'85] Our performance evaluation results remain representative for clouds that multiplex their resources among their users [\'85].\'94\cb1 \
\ls3\ilvl0
\b \cb18 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	10.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Can you cite at least two articles from the past year(s) from the target venue?
\b0  This might sounds like ass-kissing, but is a very useful tool to ensure your article fits the target community. If you cannot related to any articles in that venue, chances are reviewers will reject your article with weird comments (\'93I don\'92t get why auto-scaling is important, Amazon already does that!\'94). Try to read those articles at the \'93meta\'94 level:\
\pard\tx940\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-1440\sl480\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl1
\b \cf17 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	a.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
What vocabulary do they use?
\b0  You should definitely write a few lines about cloud computing in {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.cdc2015.ctrl.titech.ac.jp/"}}{\fldrslt \cf19 CDC}}, but you would certainly not waste paper on defining \'93cloud computing\'94 in {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.autonomic-conference.org/"}}{\fldrslt \cf19 ICCAC}}. (When I review such papers I get sleepy starting with paragraph 1.) Are terms such as \'93node\'94, \'93network\'94, \'93bandwidth\'94, \'93response time\'94, \'93throughput\'94, \'93controller\'94 used with the same meaning as you have them in your article? (E.g., \'93network\'94 might be understood as a graph, a social network or a computer network. \'93Node\'94 might be a network router, a graph node, a supercomputer \'93server\'94 or a peer-to-peer agent.) If the terms are used differently then make sure you properly define your terms to avoid confusing the reviewers.\cb1 \
\ls3\ilvl1
\b \cb18 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	b.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
What concepts and techniques are assumed known?
\b0  You would certainly not write about PID controllers in a control conference, but you might need to insert a mini-lecture on PID controllers for a peer-to-peer conference.\cb1 \
\pard\tx940\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-1440\sl480\sa300\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl1
\b \cf17 \cb18 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	c.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
What are accepted forms of hypothesis testing?
\b0  Does that community favour simulation? If yes, is there a \'93golden standard\'94 (e.g., NS3, CloudSim, PeerSim, SimGrid)? Do you or can you use it? If not, make sure you argue why you refrained from using it!\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \cb18 Does the community favour real experiments? What workloads do they commonly use (Wikipedia traces, FIFA traces, synthetic ones)? What applications (RUBiS, RUBBoS, CloudSuite)? What is the most common nature (single computer, cluster, data-center, IaaS cloud) and size of the testbed?\cb1 \uc0\u8232 \
\pard\tx940\tx1440\pardeftab720\li1440\fi-1440\sl480\partightenfactor0
\ls3\ilvl1
\b \cf17 \cb18 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	d.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Any seminal papers that you should read?
\b0  Certainly you would reject the paper of somebody who mixes IaaS and PaaS, because of not reading the \'93NIST definition of cloud computing\'94.\cb1 \
\ls3\ilvl1
\b \cb18 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	e.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
What are their core challenges?
\b0  \'93Data-centers are inefficient\'94, \'93Moore\'92s law has stopped\'94, \'93Software systems are getting increasingly complex\'94, \'93Cloud applications encounter failures\'94. Does your paper address the core challenges?\cb1 \
\ls3\ilvl1
\b \cb18 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	f.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Are there certain expectations?
\b0  E.g., to open-source simulator, to have at least 2 performance-related plots, to have around 20 references, etc.\cb1 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl480\sa300\partightenfactor0
\cf17 \cb18 If you see a mismatch between your article and the related articles from the target venue, you have several choices:\
\pard\tx220\tx720\pardeftab720\li720\fi-720\sl480\partightenfactor0
\ls4\ilvl0
\b \cf17 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	1.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Adapt
\b0 : Add another experiment with a new workload or application. Change the terms you use. Add another sentence to link your problem to the core challenges. Rethink your problem, your solution and your evaluation. Don\'92t overdo it though, you do not want to produce YAPO (\'93yet another paper on\'94).\cb1 \
\ls4\ilvl0
\b \cb18 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	2.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Use more wording
\b0 : Spend a few extra paragraphs to properly define your terms. In fact, make the terms bold when defining them to ensure your reviewer does not miss definitions. Spend more words on explaining your approach, your technique, your solution. Argue why you did not use the golden standard: \'93We refrained from using SimGrid due to a bug that exaggerates latencies of packets sent on localhost.\'94 (true story)\cb1 \
\ls4\ilvl0
\b \cb18 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 {\listtext	3.	}\expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Change venue
\b0 : You will never get an article accepted in {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.cs.huji.ac.il/~feit/parsched/"}}{\fldrslt \cf19 JSSPP}} about Wikipedia traces, just like you would not accept an article about food diet in the {\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://cloudresearch.org/workshops/6th/"}}{\fldrslt \cf19 cloud control workshop}}. Don\'92t waste time and look for a venue that is desperate to read an article like yours!\cb1 \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs24 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\
\
\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f4\fs20 \cf20 \cb0 \CocoaLigature0 ssh 147.188.200.124
\f0\fs24 \cf0 \cb1 \CocoaLigature1 \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f1 \cf0 gromit\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0 \cf0 wallace\
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f4\fs20 \cf21 \cb22 \CocoaLigature0 tinky-winky.cs.bham.ac.uk
\f0\fs24 \cf0 \cb1 \CocoaLigature1 \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 5.4+7.5=13\
\
6649\
35018\
chaturbate\
6881-6758\
35279-35145\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl300\partightenfactor0

\f5\fs26 \cf23 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
USS name: 
\f1\fs24 \cf16 48805142 pin 
\f5\fs26 \cf23 030609
\f0\fs24 \cf0 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
alexander.romanovsky@ncl.ac.uk\
amel.bennaceur @ open.ac.uk\
damianandrew.tamburri@polimi.it\
gold@ime.usp.br\
marin\
Rabih Bashroush <R.Bashroush@uel.ac.uk>\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl340\partightenfactor0
\cf0 Federica SARRO\
Yuanyuan ZHANG\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 j.thomson@st-andrews.ac.uk\
syed.islam@uel.ac.uk\
\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.rightmove.co.uk/property-for-sale/property-55476694.html"}}{\fldrslt \cf0 http://www.rightmove.co.uk/property-for-sale/property-55476694.html}}\
architectural patterns for centralised and decentralised self-adaptive software systems\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl820\partightenfactor0

\fs72 \cf23 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
749661656832\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\sl340\partightenfactor0

\f3\fs28 \cf24 CMP3CHENT
\f0\fs72 \cf23 \
\pard\pardeftab720\sl440\partightenfactor0

\f5\fs38 \cf25 Thank you for applying for Tax-Free Childcare. You're eligible to get Tax-Free Childcare for Yvonne Chen.\
Yvonne's childcare service account details are: \
\
	^	Account number: 10027165\
	^	Sort code: 60-89-71\
	^	Payment reference: 1100009243056\
\
\

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trcbpat1 \tamarb400 \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalb \clcbpat20 \clwWidth2480\clftsWidth3 \clminh20 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx2160
\clvertalb \clcbpat20 \clwWidth1980\clftsWidth3 \clminh20 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalb \clcbpat20 \clwWidth5680\clftsWidth3 \clminh20 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx6480
\clvertalb \clcbpat20 \clwWidth4260\clftsWidth3 \clminh20 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\b\fs28 \cf3 ACTIONS\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0
\cf3 PREFERENCE\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0
\cf3 REVIEWER\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0
\cf3 INSTITUTION\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trcbpat1 \tamarb400 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2480\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx2160
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1980\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth5680\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx6480
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth4260\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl320\partightenfactor0

\b0 \cf3 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 Select...
\f5 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 Edit
\f5 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 \cf27 \'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97
\f5 \cf3 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 Remove Reviewer
\f5 \'a0 \'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0
\cf3 Recommended\
Reason: Work on self-adaptive systems\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\b \cf3 Alexander Romanovsky
\b0 \
Alexander.Romanovsky@ncl.ac.uk\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0
\cf3 Newcastle University\
\
\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trcbpat1 \tamarb400 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clcbpat28 \clwWidth2480\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx2160
\clvertalt \clcbpat28 \clwWidth1980\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalt \clcbpat28 \clwWidth5680\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx6480
\clvertalt \clcbpat28 \clwWidth4260\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl320\partightenfactor0
\cf3 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 Select...
\f5 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 Edit
\f5 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 \cf27 \'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97
\f5 \cf3 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 Remove Reviewer
\f5 \'a0 \'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0
\cf3 Recommended\
Reason: Work on self-adaptive systems\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\b \cf3 Amel Bennaceur
\b0 \
amel.bennaceur@open.ac.uk\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0
\cf3 Open university\
\
\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trcbpat1 \tamarb400 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2480\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx2160
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1980\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth5680\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx6480
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth4260\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl320\partightenfactor0
\cf3 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 Select...
\f5 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 Edit
\f5 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 \cf27 \'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97
\f5 \cf3 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 Remove Reviewer
\f5 \'a0 \'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0
\cf3 Recommended\
Reason: Work on self-adaptive systems\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\b \cf3 Damian Tamburri
\b0 \
damianandrew.tamburri@polimi.it\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0
\cf3 Politecnico di Milano Dipartimento di Chimica Materiali e Ingegneria Chimica Giulio Natta\
\
\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trcbpat1 \tamarb400 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clcbpat28 \clwWidth2480\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx2160
\clvertalt \clcbpat28 \clwWidth1980\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalt \clcbpat28 \clwWidth5680\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx6480
\clvertalt \clcbpat28 \clwWidth4260\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl320\partightenfactor0
\cf3 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 Select...
\f5 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 Edit
\f5 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 \cf27 \'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97
\f5 \cf3 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 Remove Reviewer
\f5 \'a0 \'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0
\cf3 Recommended\
Reason: Work on self-adaptive systems\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\b \cf3 Alfredo Goldman
\b0 \
gold@ime.usp.br\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0
\cf3 Universidade de Sao Paulo Faculdade de Medicina\
\
\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trcbpat1 \tamarb400 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2480\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx2160
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1980\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth5680\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx6480
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth4260\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl320\partightenfactor0
\cf3 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 Select...
\f5 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 Edit
\f5 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 \cf27 \'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97
\f5 \cf3 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 Remove Reviewer
\f5 \'a0 \'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0
\cf3 Recommended\
Reason: Work on self-adaptive systems\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\b \cf3 Marin Litoiu
\b0 \
mlitoiu@yorku.ca\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0
\cf3 York university\
\
\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trcbpat1 \tamarb400 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clcbpat28 \clwWidth2480\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx2160
\clvertalt \clcbpat28 \clwWidth1980\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalt \clcbpat28 \clwWidth5680\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx6480
\clvertalt \clcbpat28 \clwWidth4260\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl320\partightenfactor0
\cf3 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 Select...
\f5 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 Edit
\f5 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 \cf27 \'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97
\f5 \cf3 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 Remove Reviewer
\f5 \'a0 \'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0
\cf3 Recommended\
Reason: Work on self-adaptive architecture\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\b \cf3 Rabih Bashroush
\b0 \
R.Bashroush@uel.ac.uk\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0
\cf3 University of East London\
\
\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trcbpat1 \tamarb400 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2480\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx2160
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1980\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth5680\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx6480
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth4260\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl320\partightenfactor0
\cf3 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 Select...
\f5 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 Edit
\f5 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 \cf27 \'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97
\f5 \cf3 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 Remove Reviewer
\f5 \'a0 \'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0
\cf3 Recommended\
Reason: work on SBSE\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\b \cf3 Federica Sarro
\b0 \
f.sarro@cs.ucl.ac.uk\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0
\cf3 University College London\
\
\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trcbpat1 \tamarb400 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clcbpat28 \clwWidth2480\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx2160
\clvertalt \clcbpat28 \clwWidth1980\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalt \clcbpat28 \clwWidth5680\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx6480
\clvertalt \clcbpat28 \clwWidth4260\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl320\partightenfactor0
\cf3 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 Select...
\f5 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 Edit
\f5 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 \cf27 \'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97
\f5 \cf3 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 Remove Reviewer
\f5 \'a0 \'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0
\cf3 Recommended\
Reason: Work on self-adaptive systems\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\b \cf3 John Thomson
\b0 \
j.thomson@st-andrews.ac.uk\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0
\cf3 University of St Andrews\
\
\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trcbpat1 \tamarb400 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth2480\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx2160
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth1980\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx4320
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth5680\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx6480
\clvertalt \clshdrawnil \clwWidth4260\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl320\partightenfactor0
\cf3 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 Select...
\f5 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 Edit
\f5 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 \cf27 \'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97
\f5 \cf3 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 Remove Reviewer
\f5 \'a0 \'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0
\cf3 Recommended\
Reason: Work on adaptive systems\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\b \cf3 Syed Islam
\b0 \
syed.islam@uel.ac.uk\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0
\cf3 University of East London\
\
\cell \row

\itap1\trowd \taflags1 \trgaph108\trleft-108 \trcbpat1 \tamarb400 \trbrdrl\brdrnil \trbrdrt\brdrnil \trbrdrr\brdrnil 
\clvertalt \clcbpat28 \clwWidth2480\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx2160
\clvertalt \clcbpat28 \clwWidth1980\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx4320
\clmgf \clvertalt \clcbpat28 \clwWidth5680\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx6480
\clmrg \clvertalt \clcbpat28 \clwWidth5680\clftsWidth3 \clbrdrt\brdrnil \clbrdrl\brdrnil \clbrdrb\brdrs\brdrw20\brdrcf26 \clbrdrr\brdrnil \clpadt160 \clpadl160 \clpadb160 \clpadr160 \gaph\cellx8640
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl320\partightenfactor0
\cf3 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 Select...
\f5 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 Edit
\f5 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 \cf27 \'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97\'97
\f5 \cf3 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0
\f6 Remove Reviewer
\f5 \'a0 \'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\'a0 \'a0\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0
\cf3 Recommended\
Reason: Work on SBSE\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\pardeftab720\sl400\partightenfactor0

\b \cf3 Yuanyuan ZHANG
\b0 \
Yuanyuan.Zhang@cs.ucl.ac.uk\cell 
\pard\intbl\itap1\cell \lastrow\row
}